---
slug: reflecting-on-my-time-in-sap
title: Reflecting on my time in SAP
description: I reflect on my 6 year career in SAP as a frontend developer.
seoTitle: Reflecting on my time in SAP
seoDescription: I reflect on my 6 year career in SAP.
timestamp: 2023-03-08T16:17:14+0000
---

# Reflecting on my time in SAP

I and several other engineers had the opportunity to be hired by SAP in the spring of 2017. This would start the most fruitful period of software development in my career (thus far).

We had been hired to help start a new AI-driven commerce platform for small to mid-sized businesses, which matched very well with the senior developers' previous work in the startup (I actually joined last year, the black sheep among the pack, after a traumatic but formative year of not understanding how ... anything worked in building production software). The intent was not to develop with SAP legacy engineers and to start a, disruptive, culture anew. (That being said, writing the backend were some of the most exceptional developers I had seen in SAP.) One of the most memorable moments in my career was when my old boss, to whom I owe the greatest debt for accepting me, told me, before we moved over to SAP, after several years working in a startup, that it was never really financially successful and this was a golden opportunity. This contradiction, the realities of enterprise world and startup world, would come up very frequently throughout my career.

It was a fun time. I had joined as a frontend developer, building the platform's merchant dashboard initially. That was the time where we, I would informally say, just "built things", trying to meet deadlines and for our own pleasure.

But that was the first error: developers need the discipline to weigh the things they want to do and the things they need to do, and be detached enough to choose the company's priorities. I would say that discipline is one of the primary qualifications behind the "senior" preceding a developer's title. We had an amazing pair of senior engineers, but they were too busy and/or inexperienced to corral in their juniors, except through code reviews and planning. Needless to say, we accumulated a lot of tech debt.

The second error was that there were always disputes between our Chief Product Officer and the immediate Product Owners. The CPO, gifted with incredible analytical insight into the commerce industry, often overrode her Product Owners' decision-making, probably for good reason. I had never been present for it myself, but she held, maybe daily, tight, involved morning meetings that likely psychologically intimidated a lot of them. The engineers, exhausted by the infighting, eventually just relied on the CPO's word for things. In short, the teams themselves were unorganized and the organization around them was a little better organized in that it revolved around one decision-maker. This, in turn, led the CPO to pick an intimate circle not out of the people who managed the product, but out of the user experience designers. Not that this was an uninformed decision - branding was key for the product, the designers had a more direct relationship with the engineers' work and they were pretty likeable people - but anyone can see it had destructive results for the team's discipline.

And then there are just straight-up startup woes. If you don't have any customers, product direction can seem lost, uninformed and unrealistic. If you have customers, you're always behind on features and looking at the money spent and the money coming in. This type of environment leads to the one consistently respected principle in startups: "Just keep working." This isn't quite a <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Death_march_(project_management)" rel="noopener noreferrer" target="_blank">death march</a> but it feels like one.

This leads to the third error: the developers are not engineers, they are developers, and they have to do anything at any cost to make sure the product is developed properly beyond their immediate engineering duties. We attempted to implement Agile in those days. Our retrospectives looked like this: We need more time to release things. Our software development manager would take that to the CPO, who would then respond: No. Perhaps one side looks better than the other, but in my experience this is an issue with both sides of the channel. A circular argument is not a dialogue. The developers need to come up with creative solutions to save time and cost as well as express the urgency of their problems. A solution does not necessarily mean a big organizational or philosophical change; sometimes a small change in habit will have discernible effect, to be iterated into a more significant change. This isn't meant to be finger-pointing nor a general observation, but something to keep in mind when analyzing one's own situation.

One of my product owners, whose team belonged to SAP and transferred over to our organization due to a much needed increase in personnel, and to whom I owe another debt for giving me the respect needed to grow my career, memorably said this was one of the most toxic cultures she had worked in. As a young man I had not realized it up to that point, but she was right. It also happened that the introduction of her team, the fuddy-duddy, "slow", legacy SAP team brought _some_ discipline into the organization, such that we were able to focus on topics like quality and releasing. And the pace never changed. So much for that superstition.

Personally speaking, I would say the organization reached full maturity when the CPO left at the end of 2020, the first year of the pandemic. To clarify, it would be absurd to pin the organization's problems on her, because I'm pretty sure anyone would have imposed the same restrictions as she did; the notable characteristic of hers was her spellbinding personality, which allowed her to be open and honest with others and convince them of her viewpoint. I think she herself understood this, as during her latter years she hired a product manager whom I found, in contrast, professional and organized. Her successors, who lacked that charisma, did not seem to have much of an idea of where to direct the product afterwards.

2021 would also be the year I underwent training to be a Professional Scrum Master(TM) from my product owner's encouragement. Scrum changed my viewpoint on life, honestly.

Scrum doesn't guarantee teams will be better, but it does guarantee the team will have every opportunity to try to be better - which, in the endless time crunch that is software development, is valuable in of itself.

One of the important lessons of Scrum is that a team is not made of engineers, quality assurance, user experience designer etc., a team is made of _developers_. A team comprises of people such that they get things done. That's it. It's brutally simple. The product owner exists to orient the developers in the right direction and the scrum master to ensure the developers understand Scrum. Beyond them, there is the rest of the organization, who makes sure the lights stay on.

Ranks are pointless in Scrum. Tiers are useless in Scrum. Seniority is unneeded in Scrum (unless the team decides otherwise). The team decides whether it itself is enough to accomplish tasks, not anyone else, and it has the existential mandate to make it so, if it is not.

Shortly into my "reign" as Scrum Master (I'm not sure if I ever did it right), I had a heated debate with someone who argued that our team needs to be like a car factory: we plug in the right components, get the feature to done, and then move on. But this is the wrong way of thinking. Software is much more complex than a car. No one ever wants the same piece of software and hardly anyone shares the same use case. Customers need to customize their solutions for their own needs. And, for a cloud product like ours, the software is ever-present, so it is always our problem, every day, even when we go to bed. We are never, ever, _ever_ done with a feature or a module, but "done" is convenient to say what we _think_ the state of our feature is.

We acknowledge software is always our problem, even when we put on civilian clothes, and we therefore anticipate, mitigate and fix issues every day in our Scrum events: Planning, Daily, Review and Retrospective. Beyond deadlines, developers need to talk about the health of the solution, through performance and automated testing, and any other metric the developers deem important. For example, we may discuss needing to take the time to onboard another team, without losing our cadence. Again, it is the _existential mandate for the developers to discuss issues like this_, and to come up with solutions, even if incomplete and incomprehensive. To do nothing and shrug our shoulders, is to go against the mandate, which is to make sure things get done.

The nice thing about Scrum is that most people, even if they are unaware of what it is, will find it reasonable and logical. All Scrum is are those events, but the values needed for a team to self-analyze look like virtues, the attributes of the impossibly-good team.

2021 was the year of true agility. We were working with the most teams on various topics - Facebook/Google integration, Storefront Hosting, Backend for Frontend, Promotions, Composable Payment and Custom Components - and, like a true team, we negotiated with them, made sure we gave them the time they needed of ours and focused, finally, on the health of our product, through testing and performance. We literally had several topics from different domains and bug incidents reported to discuss weekly and we still got features through to done every two weeks. We had very candid conversations about preventing critical bugs from reaching production. It was the most professional we've ever worked, probably because we had been burned repeatedly from our failures in the last four years.

I also want to say a beautifully-organized team is just as pleasant a sight to behold as a beautifully-executed product. I'm really proud of that year.

We were competing with another SAP commerce solution - honestly, SAP has, like, several of them at a time - which had existed since the 2000s. It had a lot of legacy customers. Whilst we, though ballooning in operational size, had maybe twenty customers. Bob Stutz, the president for all of Commerce, had determined we would be profitable in maybe a year or two; yet when Bob retired, his successor, Ritu Bhargava, took one look at our product and said, "Nope". She axed the project and shipped every development team possible to work on the more profitable legacy product.

I get it. While other team members were heartbroken, the decision seemed logical, and I felt we were playing fast and loose with practical constraints for quite a long time. Though product owners were diligent in fulfilling all of our customers' needs, in every aspect of their business, there wasn't an overall direction to differentiate us from our competitors, except for the modern-ness of our technology (we had long forgotten the AI part of our business - as we live in this modern day of OpenAI, we in hindsight can sigh with immense disappointment). I felt my job then was to immerse ourselves in the modernization of the legacy product.

Now, this thing does exist now, and the people I worked with are still working on it, so I don't want to get too much into detail about it. Because I could. Because transitioning was a nightmare. The organization surrounding the legacy product was so thoroughly un-Agile and un-modern. We never got anything done and the organization seemed happy with that.

Without a doubt it was an organization built on <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waterfall_model"  rel="noopener noreferrer" target="_blank">Waterfall</a>. The product only released versions twice a year, and they were always missing deadlines. No one implemented sprints. I had a casual conversation with a senior developer on Scrum and he said, in his own experience, it never really worked and caused more work to be done. Again, Scrum is just those events. I'm not a Mr. Know-It-All, but from the face of it it looks like the organization just did Scrum wrong.

The following year would be a lesson in what the absence of Scrum looks like, not on a technical level but on a philosophical level. One of the reasons for the shortness of sprints was so that developers felt time was flowing around them and they needed to motivate themselves to actually get from point A to point B. Dividing work into iterations - not necessarily releaseable code - facilitates that. Someone can argue that a team can become very serious during crunch time, but as a rational person, if you can't get serious during the period before your deadline, there is little reason to believe you would get serious then. (And it hardly ever works anyway, because managers typically resort to beating developers with a stick once they get closer to the deadline.)

The need to work is two-fold, for the organization to understand time is passing - and competitors are working - and for the developers to forward their careers. A company can be a bubble, protecting developers from an outside view. Once they look outside, they'll see a dramatically changed landscape where their current set of skills may not be relevant, because, again, engineering is not developing, and developing requires a set of hard and soft skills. A developer needs to improve for their future health and a company needs to want their developers to improve for its own health - and, for love of pragmatism, the hope is that the developers stay for this reason. (Being useful also has its psychological benefits.)

My role in the company was relinquished in the winter of 2023, along with 2999 others - meaning, informally, we were laid off. For the reasons I mentioned above, I was happy, because I had intended to look for a new position in the spring; though the itinerary being bumped up a few months is not great. I fought for the company for a year, trying to make them realize the enormous cost they were incurring by not changing how the organization worked, and I was burnt out, having had sufficient evidence they did not care one bit for my recommendations (relinquishing roles in key areas did not help their case either). Fair enough. I hope they find a suitable replacement.

I apologize for anyone indulging me for so long in my remembering. The most precious things I have attained from those years are memories. I hope they guide their reader to better thoughts - naming, chiefly, and selfishly, myself, as I read them over, starting a new chapter in my life. For that is the nature of Agile.
